### What is this course about? It is about Computational biomedicine. 

The quantitative aspect of biology is inherent to biology, although it is often overlooked. This is because Nature is quantitative.  The amount of rain that falls on a particular territory, and not only whether it rains or not, dictates the amount/type of vegetation, which eventually dictates the amount/type of animals the territory can feed.

Lord Kelvin expressed his view in 1883, “When you can measure what you are speaking about, and express it in numbers, you know something about it; 
but when you cannot measure it, when you cannot express it in numbers, your knowledge is of a meager and unsatisfactory kind: 
it may be the beginning of knowledge, but you have scarcely, in your thoughts, advanced to the stage of science, whatever the matter may be.”

In this introductory course to computational biomedicine we aim to give you an overview of the different steps related to acquisition, processing, visualization and analysis of quantitative data, and its integration in predictive quantitative models.

<a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=1&v=895O1RP7L6c&feature=emb_logo"> “Systems” biology/biomedicine </a>  is a conceptual approach, developed to study biological sciences from a quantitative perspective. It is very recent - the first Institute for Systems Biology was created in 2000 in Seattle by Leroy Hood and coworkers, following the first whole genome sequencing results in the late nineties in unicellular organisms. These groundbreaking datasets revealed the enormous complexity of biological systems: eukaryotic genomes are made of millions, if not billions of base pairs, all of which can virtually affect the functioning of the entire organism.
As nicely <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IbvPk5vReLY&feature=emb_logo"> explained by Leroy Hood </a>  researchers at this time needed a way, a state of mind, to conceptually think of entire biological systems in a more global way, as an alternative to the “older” reductionist biology/medicine approach that consists in dissecting the components of the system to find molecular targets to cure diseases. This is how <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=1&v=895O1RP7L6c&feature=emb_logo"> systems-level thinking </a>  emerged. 

The first genome of a human individual was sequenced in 2008. This is just a decade ago. So yes, we are, you are explorers on a brand new mountain route. And every explorer needs a survival toolkit. May this course and similar ones be your toolkits.  

Specifically, you will develop skills in systems-level thinking, biological network analysis and quantitative biomedicine. You will learn about important programming tools and the basics of biostatistics and machine learning methods, that you will apply to analyze datasets from your own or from data resources, in order to become able to work with and understand results from high-throughput biomedical experiments (imaging and omics). You will learn how to integrate quantitative data in predictive models, that will guide your experimental explorations and provide frameworks to understand counter-intuitive results.  able to acquire quantitative data and also analyze The goal of the course is to learn in this field, and to demonstrate through applications what, they will need. For each topic there will be text and/or video material, and hands-on applications including data analysis exercises in the Jupyter notebook format.

But let’s understand first why it is very, very important to fully appreciate the added value of quantitative and computational tools to biomedicine. 

<p align="center">
  <a href="p1.md">   Motivation    </a> •
  <a href="p2.md">   Systems-level thinking   </a> •
  <a href="p3.md">   Quantitative approach to biomedicine    </a> •
  <a href="p4.md">   Quantitative language    </a> •
</p>

