### Section 2 : Why biomedicine requires quantitative tools

In this video, we continue with the train station analogy. The purpose of this video is to convince you that this quantitative information is a crucial requirement to understand a biomedical problem, in particular at the systems level.

<a href="https://media.uef.fi/View.aspx?id=65543~5k~cFWwC5GVUo&code=AU~P9rOzGXmVmrIf4e4TNPzJSjff5Q5SYIZtYMgVblFMJdgc5bqnGbdNEDtua&ax=7E~muEKPC6d98vQqp"> Video 2 </a>


Video content:
The complexity of cell biological diseases stems from the fact that many different molecular events can contribute to the physiological perturbations of the disease state. The diverse disease-associated molecular events apply diverse constraints on the cellular network, resulting in quantitative imbalances in cellular states that call for quantitative approaches. 

In most biomedical research fields, the 6 basic questions a journalist would ask are only partially answered.  The information of when, where and how much of the cellular components are interacting is missing.  

Let us come back to our train network analogy. A critical mutation in the Kouvola station like for instance broken eastbound railways could deviate all trains towards Lahti. But alternatively, delays resulting from railway maintenance works much further north could results in afternoon passengers missing the last eastbound correspondence, leaving no other choice that going westbound or staying in Kouvola. In this situation, however, morning passengers would still be able to proceed to Lappeenranta. 

In the presence of a mutation, the network itself is altered. In the presence of a delay in the signal processing, the network is intact. However a change in a quantitative parameter of the network, a delay in train progression, had the same overall effect for the afternoon travelers, but no effect at all for the morning travelers. Hence, in this case, the way the network responds to the perturbation also depends on the timing of the stimulus. From a therapeutic perspective, pharmacologically restoring the broken railway, or adding late trains from Kouvola to Lappeenranta would be two efficient but radically different ways to solve the disease problem in the two situations.

But choosing between these two strategies would require first to know that Kouvola is a hub connection separating networks in south east from south west finland, in other words a connection separating two functional subnetworks. This is not obvious looking at the network structure only, and systems approaches can help identify these kind of hubs. 

Another therapeutic strategy that would work in both situations could be to re-route our train way upstream of the Kouvola hub region, through Eastern Finland. Again, the pharmacological implementation of this strategy would require an a priori knowledge of how the northern, eastern and southeastern subnetworks communicate. Moreover, this strategy should be supplemented with additional east-west trains to compensate for the loss of the Oulu-Kouvola connection. 

Beyond spatial and temporal parameters, “how much” cellular components are present and interact can have a drastic effect on the network response to the stimulus. Assume that in the normal cell, the conductor of the Oulu-Kouvola train changes at the Pieksämäki station, with a new conductor coming from Joensuu and the original one leaving on a train to south west Finland. Assume a sick cell has delays in conveying the second conductor to pieksämäki, then the first one is left with three options: wait, leading to delays at Kouvola, as discussed a minute ago. Keep on its original schedule, leaving our train in Pieksämäki; or carry on, leading to the cancelation of the westbound train. In this scenario, the number of train conductors available in Pieksämäki becomes a limiting factor due to the disease-associated quantitative delays, forcing the cell to make a decision between three choices that will all have detrimental consequences. 

Train staff is regularly transported by trains, and these situations are common in train network management. But because the decisional units at the headquarters of the train company have all the information on the current status of the network in hand, and know all the scheduled trains, they can make a wise decision to fix the problem.  

In biomedicine, because we don’t have all this quantitative information, we can’t. In addition, our lack of quantitative knowledge might also confound our analysis of the network structure itself: in the last example, because train conductors are nearly limiting in the normal cell, a perturbation on the Joensuu-Pieksämäki axis shows strong effects on a completely different line. Hence, it might give the impression to the unprepared experimentalist that the Joensuu-Pieksämäki axis is literally on the Oulu Kouvola axis. In fact it is not, but the limitation in the number of train conductors generates an effective strong connection between the Eastern Finland network and the north south axis. 

Hence, this naïve analogy between biological and train networks teaches us that it is crucial to learn more about quantitative parameters of the biological networks, in order to devise clever therapeutic strategies that shall target the regulation of multiple distinct functional modules at the systems level. Once we are able to know how many trains take which routes, when, who are the passengers, conductors… and so on and so forth, then we will be able to devise efficient therapeutic strategies, certainly involving synchronized regulation of multiple, well-chosen targets and functions. Along the same lines, we recommend reading Yuri Lazebnik’s paper “Can a biologist fix a radio? Or, what I learned while studying apoptosis”, published 20 years ago but still very relevant today [2].  


Additional reading: 
<a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/s1535-6108(02)00133-2"> [2] </a> Lazebnik Y. (2002) Can a biologist fix a radio? Or, what I learned while studying apoptosis. Cancer Cell 2:179-82, and the comments on this article.

<p align="center">
  <a href="p1.md">   Motivation    </a> •
  <a href="p2.md">   Systems-level thinking   </a> •
  <a href="p3.md">   Quantitative approach to biomedicine    </a> •
  <a href="p4.md">   Quantitative language    </a> •
</p>
