### Section 3 : Why biomedicine requires a quantitative language 

Biomedical systems are made of cells, cells of molecules, molecules of atoms …etc.  While the biology language has been developed over centuries to describe macroscopic biological systems, mostly at the qualitative level, the (quantitative) languages which have been derived to describe molecules is physics, and to describe atoms quantum physics (in other words, mathematics). This difference stems from the historical distinction between life sciences and physical sciences, and we are now realizing that this distinction does not make a lot of sense. When you are working on the quantitative analysis of cells, you are at the crossroad between those length-scales, so you are at the crossroad of those descriptive languages, all of which have advantages and pitfalls. Furthermore, you are using also another type of language, programming, to write down the analysis steps in a computer-understandable format, because most biological problems cannot be solved by current analytical mathematics. This is a strongly <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SjXpAwXL9es&feature=emb_logo"> interdisciplinary field </a> interdisciplinary field, and as a quantitative biologist you will have to collaborate and communicate with a broad range of specialists, physicists, mathematicians, computer scientists, geneticists, biochemists… etc. 

There is not, yet, any common language perfectly suited to quantitative cell biology, that would be understood by experts of all these fields. Therefore, inter-disciplinary communication will require that biologists learn the basic concepts and formal language of quantitative sciences, and that physicists or mathematicians learn some elementary cell biology concepts. 

Another current challenge in this field is related to what data and tools are available to the community at large <a href="https://academic.oup.com/gigascience/article/8/10/giz127/5606725"> (Macklin 2019) </a>. It is an important goal to move beyond single-laboratory efforts to establish a community dedicated to promote compatible data and software usage.

<p align="center">
  <a href="p1.md">   Motivation    </a> •
  <a href="p2.md">   Systems-level thinking   </a> •
  <a href="p3.md">   Quantitative approach to biomedicine    </a> •
  <a href="p4.md">   Quantitative language    </a> •
</p>
