### Learning objectives

The aim of the course is to introduce you to important concepts within the field of computational biomedicine as well as to programming. It will provide you with knowledge and ideas that can help you bridge the communication between traditional molecular biologist and computational biologists, and hopefully inspire you to how you can use computational biomedicine in your own research.

This course does not claim to make you an expert within computational science, or train you to do sophisticated programming on your own. These are skills you would need to develop further in follow-up courses or projects. However, we hope that the relevance and practical challenges & solutions become easier to connect with theory by going over the exercise materials.

### Future
Computational biomedicine is a rapidly growing and evolving field. This is partly due to the changes - or paradigm shift - going on in the fields of cell and molecular biology: a change from a reductionist approach with focus on the biology of a single or a few components to a much more integrative approach where we look at systems biology. This change is highly driven by the development within computer science and large-scale studies in the fields of genomics, proteomics, imaging etc. producing "big data" that needs to be integrated in order to obtain relevant and important knowledge within biomedicine. Traditional molecular biology researchers therefore needs to team up with experts within the fields of computational sciences and develop advanced computer algorithms, databases, statistical tools and mathematical models. Such interdisciplinary studies are the way forward for development of e.g. personalized and predictive medicine and precision diagnostics tools.  
