Up to this point, most interaction you have with your computer is facilitated through a graphical user interface (GUI): the virtual space on your screen where you can navigate and interact with the computer's software with the cursor by means of point-and-click. In the terminal (also known as shell or command prompt) you interact with the computer through text commands instead, which turns out to be a tremendously useful skill as a programmer.

The terminal let's you do everything you could otherwise do in the GUI, and often a lot faster.

### Walk-through of basics

Start by opening the terminal. For windows users, the terminal is known as the command prompt, and can be accessed by searching for it in the start menu (or typing win+R, write 'cmd' and press Enter). In Mac and Linux you can find it by searching for 'Terminal' (Mac users with spotlight). A new window will open, looking something like the one illustrated above.

Note: Keep in mind that the language differs somewhat between the different shells. The default shell for Windows is the command prompt, while MacOS and Linux uses the more universal bash (bourne again shell) as default (you can check your shell using echo $0). If the commands provided in this guide don't work, you may find the equivalent command by looking it up in this table. Also, Window uses backwards slash ("\") where Mac/Linux uses forward slash ("/").

The first thing you should do is to locate where you are. Type pwd (MacOS/Linux) or cd (Windows) and press enter, and will see something like c/Users/Username/some_directory. To display the contents in your working directory, enter ls (MacOS/Linux) or dir (Windows). To move to another folder, use the change directory command followed by the name of the directory: cd another_dir. You can also peak into a directory by typing ls/dir dir_name. To move back enter cd .. (two periods refers to the directory one level above your location). A single period refers to the one you are currently in. So typing cd . does absolutely nothing. The paths can also be chained together: if you want to move up one level and then into a new directory, you can write cd ../some_other_dir.

To create a new directory enter mkdir dir_name. To remove a directory enter rmdir dir_name (only works if the directory is already empty). Removing other filetypes is performed using the rm (Mac) or del (Windows) command, and passing the file name as an argument You can also remove a list of files in a single command by typing something like rm file1 file2 file3. WARNING: ONCE A FILE IS REMOVED USING THIS METHOD, THERE IS NO WAY BACK! Files can also be moved between directories using the mv (Mac/Linux) or move (Windows) command (notice that mv is also used for re-naming, which may create some trouble - you always specify first from, then to where/which name).

cmd - open terminal in windows.

pwd - "print working directory" (tells you where you are in the computer file system right now).

dir (windows computer) / ls (mac computer) - list content of working directory.

dir Documents - list content of a folder placed in your working directory - here a folder with the name Documents. 

cd - change directory 

cd Documents - change directory to the folder Documents (requires that the folder called Documents is placed in your current working directory).

cd .. - moves you one level up compared to your current working directory. I.e. if you use the cd Documents command first and then use the cd .. command you will end up where you started. 

Press the TAB key to autocomplete your words, e.g. write dir doc and press TAB. The result will be dir Documents (if you have a folder called Documents in your working directory).

cd ..\.. (win)
cd ../.. (mac) - moves you two levels up compared to your current working directory. 

You open a text file by writing the name (or beginning of name and press TAB key) and press enter. You open a program - e.g. notepad - in the same way, just write notepad and press enter. 

rm - remove file or directory, e.g. rm myfile.txt. TAKE CARE - a removed file cannot be recovered. 

mkdir - make new folder, e.g. mkdir MyDocuments will make a folder with the name MyDocuments.

echo %PATH% (win)
echo $PATH$ (mac) - lists the places that your computer look for programs (see more about paths below).


### Example

Suppose that you want to clean up a messy directory which has a mixture of image files, text files, and subfolders. To systematize, you decide to move all image-files into one folder, all text files into a second folder etc. To achieve this, you would have to manually find each picture file, laboriously moving it into another folder called 'Pictures'. If you know how to use the terminal, you can simply move all png-files (or any other file type) to another directory by entering:

> mv *.png other_folder (Mac)

> move *.png other_folder (Win)

(Never mind the syntax, you will learn that as we go along).

### Flags

Most commands have flags (options) enabled, which let you modify the command slightly. For instance, when removing a file (or list of files), you should generally add a flag which gives you a second chance before deleting it permantently. For Mac/Linux, we would write

> rm -i file_name

And in Windows:

> del /p file_name

This will prompt you before deleting the file: entering Y deletes the file, and N keeps it. This syntax is quite general, so you should memorize it:

> command flag arguments

In Windows, flags are specified with "/" instead of "-".

### Help options

Maybe the most useful option is the help option: --help (Mac/Linux) and /? for windows. For instance, if we want to see all the options for the command mv simply enter mv --help. For an even more in-depth manual, you can use the man command (only Mac/Linux) to display the manual page for the command you want.

### The PATH variable
As illustrated in the video starting applications can also be done from the shell, simply by writing the app name. For instance in Windows we can write notepad to open the text editor, or calc to open the calculator. Other apps will not work, for instance firefox (or whichever is your browser of choice). This is because your shell keeps a list of which directories to look into whenever you use a command - the PATH variable (the PATH variable is one among many environmental variables. You can see all your environmental variables using printenv). To display only the PATH variable, enter echo $PATH (Mac/Linux) or echo %PATH% (Windows) - each individual path is separated by a semicolon. Unless the app you are trying to reach is in any of the listed paths, it will not be recognized by the shell. This will often lead to difficulty, and can be solved either by moving (with cd) into the directory of the app, or by adding the location to your PATH variable.

Appending to your PATH
If your shell throws an error when you attempt to run a program, it is usually because it is not in your PATH. To add to your PATH, Windows users can navigate to Control Panel > System and Security > System. Here press "advanced system settings". Go to the "advanced" tab, and open "Environment variables". Under System variables, find the one called "Path" and select "Edit". Here you are free to add and modify paths to your liking. MacOS/Linux users will have to append to the PATH from the terminal. Entering nano ~/.bash_profile will open the file .bash_profile in the text editor nano (~ is shorthand for your home directory). In this file, add the line export PATH="/path/to/append:$PATH", where /path/to/append is the global path to the relevant directory, for instance /home/username/anaconda2/bin.



### Some additional tips and useful commands

The asterisk (*) is a symbol which lets you match specific patterns in file names. For example, if I want to display all the files in the current directory which start with the word christmas, you would enter ls christmas* (the * matches anything that comes after christmas).
The 'greater than' symbol (>) can be used to push the output of a command into a file. For example, you can make a text file from the terminal as follows:  echo some_text > new_document.txt. This creates a brand new file automatically containing whatever you entered as argument to the echo command (you may need to wrap the text into double quotes). WARNING: The '>' symbol will overwrite a file if it already exists!
cat filename (Mac/Linux) and type filename (Win) print the contents of a file into the terminal.
